Newsletters: add 164 (2021-09-01) (#636)
bitcoinops/bitcoinops.github.io: _includes/specials/taproot/en/10-ln-with-taproot.md

*By [ZmnSCPxj][], LN protocol developer*

In this post, we'll look at two privacy features that [taproot][topic taproot] enables
for LN:

* [PTLCs][topic ptlc] over LN.
* P2TR Channels.

### PTLCs Over LN

PTLCs enable [many features][suredbits payment points], with a major
feature for LN being [payment decorrelation][p4tr ptlcs] without
any need to randomize routes.[^route-randomization] Every node along a
single-path or [multipath][topic multipath payments] route can be given a scalar that is used to
tweak each forwarded PTLC, enabling *payment decorrelation* where
individual forwards no longer [leak][news163 htlc problems] the unique identifier for each
LN payment.

PTLCs are ***not a privacy panacea***.  If a surveillant node sees a
forward with a particular timelock and value, and a second surveillant
node shortly after sees a forward with a *lower* timelock and *slightly
lower* value, then *very likely* those forwards belong to the same
payment path, even if the surveillant nodes can no longer correlate them
via a unique identifying hash.  However, we *do* get:

> * Increased uncertainty in the analysis.  The probabilities surveillant

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Increased uncertainty in the analysis.  The probabilities a surveillant
```

  can work with are now lower and thus their information is that much
  less valuable.
* A *lot* more decorrelation in multipath payments.  Separate paths will
  not have strong timelock and value correlation with each other, and if
  LN succeeds, there should be enough payments that timing
  correlation is not reliable either.
* No increase in cost compared to an [HTLC][topic htlc] (and possibly even a slight
  cost reduction due to [multisignature efficiency][p4tr
  multisignatures]).

In principle, a pre-taproot channel can be upgraded to support PTLCs without
closing and reopening the channel.  Existing channels can host PTLCs by
creating an offchain transaction that spends the existing non-taproot
funding output to a taproot output containing a PTLC.  That means adding
support for PTLCs over LN does not require any cost to users
beyond each node and its channel peers upgrading their software.

However, to actually use PTLCs, *every* forwarding node from the spender

> to the receiver must support PTLCs.  This means PTLC support may remain
> largely unused until a sufficient number of nodes have upgraded.  They

Reviewer: Maybe?

```suggestion
to the receiver must support PTLCs.  This means that actual use of PTLCs may remain
low until a sufficient number of nodes have upgraded.  They
```

Author: I prefer the original version.

don't all necessary need to use the same protocol (there could be
multiple PTLC protocols), but they all must support some PTLC protocol.
Having to support multiple PTLC protocols would be an added maintenance
burden and I *hope* we do not have too many such protocols (ideally just
one).

### P2TR Channels

One solution for improving the decorrelation between the base layer and
the LN layer has been [unpublished channels][topic unannounced channels]---channels whose
existence isn't gossiped on LN.

Unfortunately, every LN channel requires cooperation between two signers, and in the current
pre-taproot Bitcoin, every 2-of-2 script is *openly* coded.  LN is the

> most popular user of 2-of-2 multisignature, so any blockchain explorer
> can see that this is a LN channel being closed.  The funds can then be traced

Reviewer: Isn't this actually even a much wider sphere of observers?

```suggestion
most popular user of 2-of-2 multisignature, so anyone glancing at a block chain explorer
can surmise that this is a LN channel being closed.  The funds can then be traced
```

> from there, and if it goes to another P2WSH output, then that is likely

Reviewer: "the funds" --> they?

```suggestion
from there, and if they go to another P2WSH output, then that is likely
```

> *By [ZmnSCPxj][]*

Reviewer 2: It might be nice here or early in this segment to note what ZmnSCPxj's role in the efforts outlined below are as it provides better context for later in the segments where estimates are being given ("what who is this person to be estimating?")

Author: Good suggestion! I forgot that, outside of LN dev, there are only a few who know how epic ZmnSCPxj is.

In this post, we'll look at two privacy features that [taproot][topic taproot] enables
for LN:

* [PTLCs][topic ptlc] over LN.
* P2TR Channels.

### PTLCs Over LN

PTLCs enable [many features][suredbits payment points], with a major
feature for LN being [payment decorrelation][p4tr ptlcs] without
any need to randomize routes.[^route-randomization] Every node along a
single-path or [multipath][topic multipath payments] route can be given a scalar that is used to
tweak each forwarded PTLC, enabling *payment decorrelation* where

> individual forwards no longer leak the unique identifier for each

Reviewer 2: Could link to https://bitcoinops.org/en/newsletters/2021/08/25/#privacy-problems-with-htlcs if you think it works.

LN payment.

> PTLCs are ***not a privacy panacea***.  If a surveilant node sees a

Reviewer 2: s/surveilant/surveillant throughout

  multisignatures]).

In principle, a pre-taproot channel can be upgraded to support PTLCs without
closing and reopening the channel.  Existing channels can host PTLCs by
creating an offchain transaction that spends the existing non-taproot
funding output to a taproot output containing a PTLC.  Thus getting
support for PTLCs over LN does not require any cost to users
beyond each node and its channel peers upgrading their software.

However, to actually use PTLCs, *every* forwarding node from the spender
to the receiver must support PTLCs.  This means PTLC support may remain
largely unused until a sufficient number of nodes have upgraded.  They
don't all necessary need to use the same protocol (there could be
multiple PTLC protocols), but they all must support some PTLC protocol.
Having to support multiple PTLC protocols would be an added maintenance
burden and I *hope* we do not have too many such protocols (ideally just
one).

### P2TR Channels

One solution for improving the decorrelation between the base layer and
the LN layer has been [unpublished channels][topic unannounced channels]---channels whose
existence isn't gossiped on LN.

> Unfortunately, every LN channel is a 2-of-2, and in the current

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Unfortunately, every LN channel is a 2-of-2 multisignature, and in the current
```

> pre-taproot Bitcoin, every 2-of-2 is *openly* coded.  LN is the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
pre-taproot Bitcoin, every 2-of-2 output is *openly* coded.  LN is the
```

> most popular user of 2-of-2 multisignature, so any blockchain explorer

Reviewer 3: Optech style guide is "block chain"

```suggestion
most popular user of 2-of-2 multisignature, so any block chain explorer
```

(there are 3 other "blockchain" instances in the document)

from there, and if it goes to another P2WSH output, then that is likely
to be *another* unpublished channel.  Thus, even unpublished channels
are identifiable onchain once they are closed, with some level of false
positives.

Taproot, by using [schnorr signatures][topic schnorr signatures], allows for n-of-n to look exactly
the same as 1-of-1.  With some work, even [k-of-n][topic threshold signature] will also look the same
as 1-of-1 (and n-of-n).  We can then propose a feature where an LN
channel is backed by a P2TR UTXO, i.e. a
P2TR channel, which increases the *onchain* privacy of
unpublished channels.[^two-to-tango]

<!-- P2WSH 2-of-2: itemCount OP_0 <sig> <sig> <2 <key> <key> 2 OP_CMS>
             220 =   1 + 1 + 1+72 +1+72 +1+1+1+33+1+33+1+1

                  outpoint + nSequence + scriptSig + witness
             96 = 36 + 4 + 1 + 220/4
     P2TR: itemCount <sig>
             66 = 1 + 1 + 64

                    outpoint + nSequence + scriptSig + witness
             57.5 = 36 + 4 + 1 + 66/4

    Comparison:
      38.5 = 96 - 57.5
      ~40% = 1 - 57.5 / 96
-->

This (rather small) privacy boost also helps published channels as well.

> Published channels are only gossiped until they are closed, so somebody

Reviewer 3: Perhaps:

```suggestion
Published channels are only gossiped while they are still open, so somebody
```

is a bit clearer?

trying to look for published channels will not be able to learn about
*historical* channels.  If a surveilant wants to see every published
channel, it has to store all that data itself and cannot rely on any
kind of "archival" node.

In addition, taproot keypath spends are 38.5 vbytes (40%) smaller than
LN's existing P2WSH spends.  Unfortunately, you **cannot upgrade
an existing pre-taproot channel to a P2TR channel**.  The
existing channel uses the existing P2WSH 2-of-2 scheme and has to be
closed in order to switch to a P2TR channel.

> In theory, the actual funding transaction outpoint is really a concern

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In theory, the actual funding transaction outpoint is only a concern
```

of the two nodes that use the channel.  Other nodes on the network will
not care about what secures the channel between any two nodes.  However,
published channels are shared over the LN gossip network.  When a
node receives a gossiped published channel, it consults its own trusted

> blockchain fullnode, checking if the funding outpoint exists, and more

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
full node, checking if the funding outpoint exists, and more
```

or:

```suggestion
Bitcoin full node, checking if the funding outpoint exists, and more
```

PTLC-over-LN, then I expect P2TR channels will start
getting worked on by the time the underlying [SIGHASH_ANYPREVOUT][topic sighash_anyprevout] or other
ways to implement Decker-Russell-Osuntokun ("[Eltoo][topic eltoo]") are available.

[^route-randomization]:
    A payer can choose a very twisty path (i.e. route randomization) to
    make HTLC correlation analysis wrong, but that has its own drawbacks:

    * Twisty paths are costlier *and* less reliable (more nodes
      have to be paid, and more nodes need to *successfully* forward
      in order for the payment to reach the destination).
    * Twisty paths are longer, meaning the payer is telling *more*
      nodes about the payment, making it *more* likely they will hit
      *some* surveilant node.
      Thus, twisty paths are not necessarily a perfect improvement
      in privacy.

[^planning-details]:
    Yes, details matter, but they also do not: from a high enough
    vantage point, the unexpected hardships of some aspect of
    development and the unexpected non-hardships of other aspects
    of development cancel out, and we are left with every major
    feature being roughly around some average time frame, with

>     any unexpectedly high bonus or malus being "just noise".

Reviewer 3: 'malus' isn't a very common word (I wasn't familiar with it, at least). Consider rewording to something that readers will be more familiar with, or just finishing the sentence after "some average time frame" - "bonus or malus" is mostly repetitive with "hardships and non-hardships" earlier.

>     Yes, there are more developers now, that also means we need

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure how important this paragraph is to the main focus of the article. I'd be tempted to drop it.
